.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt GSP-MACROS 7
.Os GSP 4.0
.Sh NAME
.Nm gsp-macros
.Nd macro system for GSP documents
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Macros offer a means to dynamically generate output using external
executables.
Arguments are passed from a macro invokation to the underlying macro
executable by means of environment variables and the standard input
allowing for the easy extension of GSP documents from any programming
language.
.Pp
For details on the syntax of macros as well as the differences between
regular and verbatim macros,
see
.Xr gsp 5 .
.Ss Macro Resolution
The manner in which macros are resolved is implementation-defined.
When using the standard
.Xr gsp 1
GSP to HTML transpiler,
a macro
.Ql $foo
or
.Ql $$foo
will be resolved by searching the macro search path for the first
file with the name
.Pa foo .
When a conflict arises,
the first match in the macro search path is used.
.Ss Input and Output
Macros receive their body content via the standard input,
and are replaced in the document by their standard output.
.Pp
Because it is often important for syntactical reasons to know if the
body is a regular body or a textual body,
the
.Ev GSP_TEXT_P
environment variable will be set to
.Ql 1
when the macro body is a text body,
and
.Ql 0
otherwise.
.Pp
It is also important when producing generated output that attribute
values and node text bodies properly escape characters with special
meaning.
For this purpose it may be useful to make use of the
.Xr gspesc 1
tool that ships with the standard GSP distribution.
.Ss Parameter Passing
It is possible to pass additional parameters from the GSP document to
macros through the use of attributes.
Attributes provided to a macro are uppercased,
prefixed with
.Sq GSP_
and inserted into the macros environment.
Additionally all hyphens
.Pq Sq \-
in the attribute name are replaced with underscores
.Pq Sq _ .
When an attribute is provided without a value,
the corresponding environment variable will be set with a null value.
.Pp
The following is a list of example translations between node
attributes and the exposed environment variables:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width data-name="~tvoss"
.It data-name=\(dq~tvoss\(dq
.Ev GSP_DATA_NAME=~tvoss
.It disabled
.Ev GSP_DISABLED=
.It lang=\(dqen\(dq
.Ev GSP_LANG=en
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.\" TODO
.\" GSP_TEXT_P
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following macro expands into a
.Ql time
node representing the current date and time in the specified timezone.
If no timezone is specified,
it defaults to the local timezone.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#!/bin/sh
# File saved as \(oqnow\(cq in the macro search path

[ -n "$GSP_TZ" ] && export TZ="$GSP_TZ"

cat <<EOF
time datetime=\(dq$(date \(aq+%Y-%m-%dT%T\(aq)\(dq {-
	$(date \(aq+%H:%M &ndash; %A, %e %B %Y\(aq)
}
EOF
.Ed
.Pp
The above macro can then be used in a GSP document like so:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
p {- Published at @$now tz="Europe/Stockholm" {}}
.Ed
.Pp
The following macro generates a section header with an auto-generated
ID:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#!/bin/sh

if [ \(dq$GSP_TEXT_P\(dq -eq 0 ]
then
	>&2 printf \(aqheader: macro only accepts text bodies\en\(aq
	exit 1
fi

title=\(dq$(cat)\(dq
id=\(dq$(
	echo \(dq$title\(dq            \e
	| sed \(aqs/^ *//; s/ *$//\(aq \e
	| tr \(aqA-Z_ \(aq \(aqa-z--\(aq     \e
	| tr -dc \(aqa-z--\(aq
)\(dq

# Important that we use \(oq{=\(cq here to respect the user\(cqs original
# whitespace control settings.  If the user used \(oq{-\(cq the input
# will already have been trimmed for us.
printf \(aqh2 #%s {=%s}\(aq \(dq$id\(dq \(dq$title\(dq
.Ed
.Pp
The above macro can then be used in a GSP document like so:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
article {
	$header {- GSP Macro Reference }
	p {-
		Macros offer a means to dynamically generate output
		using external executables.
	}
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gsp 1 ,
.Xr gspesc 1 ,
.Xr sh 1 ,
.Xr gsp 5
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Thomas Voss Aq Mt mail@thomasvoss.com
