.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt GSP 5
.Os GSP 4.0
.Sh NAME
.Nm GSP
.Nd language reference for GSP
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
language is an HTML-compatible markup language.
.Nm
documents can be transpiled to valid HTML5 by way of the
.Xr gsp 1
transpiler.
The
.Nm
language allows you to structure data in the same manner as HTML while
offering an easier-to-read and less verbose syntax,
as well as some helpful shorthand syntaxes for common tasks.
.Sh LANGUAGE SYNTAX
.Ss Nodes
Nodes are the central building block of a
.Nm
document.
A node consists of a name,
an optional series of attributes,
and a node body.
A meta tag detailing the document character set may look like so:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
meta charset=\(dqUTF\-8\(dq {}
.Ed
.Pp
Nodes can be trivially nested within other nodes.
The following shows the skeleton of a basic HTML document:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
html lang=\(dqen\(dq {
	head { ... }
	body { ... }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Some specific elements such as
.Sq br ,
.Sq meta ,
and
.Sq link
are defined as
.Sq void elements
by the HTML living standard.
Such elements are forbidden from having child nodes.
.Pp
Note that attributes are not required to be space-separated,
although it is considered good style to always space-separate them.
.Pp
For details on what characters are allowed in node names,
see
.Sx Character Sets .
.Ss Comments
A node and all of its subnodes can be commented out by prefixing it
with
.Sq /
followed by zero or more spaces.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
div {
	/ p {\- I am commented out }
	p {\- I am not commented out }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Classical line comments are not supported,
but can be emulated by commenting out a dummy node:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/ _ {\- TODO: Update the year }
footer {\- \(co 2025 The GSP Developers }
.Ed
.Ss Attributes
Attributes are optional components of a node.
They take the form of an attribute name and an optional attribute
value.
To specify an attribute, simply write the attribute name:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
name
.Ed
.Pp
If you want to provide a value, you must follow the name with an
equals sign
.Pq Sq =
and then wrap the value in double quotes
.Pq Sq \(dq :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
name=\(dqvalue\(dq
.Ed
.Pp
The same attribute may be specified multiple times,
in which case its value will be the concatination of all specified
values with a space
.Pq Sq \ \& .
As as a result,
the following two examples are equivalent:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
blockquote
	data\-author=\(dq~lmatei\(dq
	data\-author=\(dq~tvoss\(dq
{\- ... }

blockquote data\-author=\(dq~lmatei ~tvoss\(dq {\- ... }
.Ed
.Pp
Backslashes
.Pq Sq \e
can be used to escape quotation marks and other backslashes that
appear in the value:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
name=\(dqhe said \e\(dqhello there\e\(dq\(dq
.Ed
.Pp
For details on what characters are allowed in attribute names,
see
.Sx Character Sets .
.Ss IDs and Classes
IDs and classes are typically the most common attributes you want to
specify on a node,
and as such there exists a shorthand syntax for specifying IDs and
classes matching CSS selector syntax.
.Pp
Since these are just shorthand syntaxes,
the following examples are considered equivalent:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
h1 #intro .bold .underline {\- ...}

h1 id=\(dqintro\(dq class=\(dqbold underline\(dq {\- ...}
.Ed
.Pp
When using this shorthand syntax,
the ID and class names follow the same rules as attribute names.
To define an ID or class that uses disallowed characters in its name,
the longform syntax should be used:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
h1 class=\(dqclass#name#using#hashes\(dq {\- ...}
.Ed
.Ss Document Types
There exists no syntax for declaring document types in
.Nm
documents.
Transpilers between
.Nm
and HTML such as
.Xr gsp 1
may decide how they wish to handle document types,
if they wish to handle them at all.
.Ss Text
The follow subsection does not apply to the
.Ql style
and
.Ql script
nodes.
Details regarding the special handling of those nodes,
see
.Sx CSS and JavaScript .
.Pp
If a node body features either a minus or an equals-sign directly
after the opening brace
.Po
.Sq {\-
or
.Sq {=
.Pc
then the contents of the node body are taken to be text as opposed to
additional child nodes.
.Pp
The difference between the two forms of text body revolves around
whitespace handling.
When opened with
.Sq {\- ,
all leading and trailing whitespace is removed.
This includes not just ASCII spaces,
but other forms of whitespace such as non-breaking spaces too.
To avoid whitespace trimming and to manage whitespace manually,
a text body can be opened via
.Sq {= .
.Pp
Within body text the following characters have special meaning which
can be ignored by way of backslash-escaping:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width indent
.It @
Begins an embedded node
.Pq see Sx Embedded Nodes
.It \e
Begins an escape sequence
.It {
Ignored for purposes of brace-balancing when escaped
.It }
Ignored for purposes of brace-balancing when escaped
.El
.Pp
When unescaped,
braces are always balanced and as such rarely require manual escaping:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
p {- GSP node bodies are delimited by \(oq{\(cq and \(oq}\(cq. }
.Ed
.Ss Embedded Nodes
Embedded nodes allow you to embed nodes within text.
These nodes are exactly the same as regular nodes,
but are prefixed by an at symbol
.Pq Sq @ .
Since embedded nodes behave identically to regular nodes,
they can also be commented out:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
p {-
	Kokkola (Swedish: @em{-Karleby}) is a town in Finland and the
	regional capital of Central Ostrobothnia.
	@/_{- TODO: Figure out the Finnish and Swedish names }
}
.Ed
.Ss Macros
NOTE: This subsection only discusses the function and syntax of
macros.
For documentation on creating macros and how they operate,
see
.Xr gsp-macros 7 .
.Pp
Macros offer a means to dynamically generate output using external
executables.
There are two types of macros:
regular macros,
and verbatim macros.
Regular macros are macros that output valid
.Nm
markup,
which is then reparsed and evaluated.
Verbatim macros on the other hand do not have their output processed.
This means that when transpiling
.Nm
to HTML,
special care must be taken to ensure that all verbatim macros output
valid HTML markup.
.Pp
Macros are syntactically identical to regular nodes,
except that their names must be prefixed with a dollar sign
.Pq Sq $ :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
p {-
	Today\(cqs date is @$date{}.
}
.Ed
.Pp
Verbatim macros are specified and used in the same manner,
except that they must be prefixed with two dollar signs:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pre {
	$$syntax_highlight lang="c" {- $$include file="main.c" {} }
}
.Ed
.Ss CSS and JavaScript
CSS and JavaScript can be included in
.Nm
documents by way of the
.Ql style
and
.Ql script
nodes.
Unlike other nodes,
these nodes do not take text or node bodies,
they instead take CSS markup in the case of
.Ql style
and JavaScript code in the case of
.Ql script .
As these nodes do not take standard text-bodies and instead have their
respective languages handled natively,
metacharacters described in
.Sx Text
do not require escaping,
and neither the CSS markup or JavaScript code undergoes any HTML
escaping during transpilation by transpilation tooling.
.Pp
To ease tooling implementation,
full-blown CSS or JavaScript parsing is not required.
The
.Ql style
and
.Ql script
tags instead simply need to handle brace nesting.
This allows implementations to simply need to implement basic lexers
for the two languages.
.Pp
The following is an example of using CSS and JavaScript from within a
.Nm
document:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
head {
	style {
		.article-list li {
			font-weight: bold;
			text-decoration: underline;
			text-decoration-skip-ink: all;
		}
	}
	script {
		document.addEventListener(\(dqDOMContentLoaded\(dq, _ =>
			console.log(\(dqDOM fully loaded and parsed\(dq));
	}
}
.Ed
.Ss Character Sets
.Nm
defines 3 distinct sets of characters:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Identifier Starters
Characters which are legal as the first character in a node or
attribute name.
.Pp
This set is defined as the characters allowed as the first character
in an XML tag name,
plus the dollar sign
.Pq Sq $ .
.It Identifier Continuers
Characters which are legal in a node or attribute name,
but not necessarily in the first position.
.Pp
This set is defined as the characters which are legal in an XML tag
name,
but not necessarily in the first position.
.It Whitespace
Characters which are recognized as whitespace and are ignored for
parsing purposes,
and which are trimmed by automatic whitespace trimming.
.Pp
This set is defined as the set of all Unicode characters with the
.Sq White_Space
property.
.El
.Sh FILES
The prefered file extension for
.Nm
documents is
.Sq Pa .gsp .
.Sh EXAMPLES
For a simple example of a complete
.Nm
document,
see the supplied examples in
.Pa @DOCPATH@ .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gsp 1 ,
.Xr gspesc 1 ,
.Xr gsp-macros 7 ,
.Xr unicode 7
.Pp
.Lk https://html.spec.whatwg.org "HTML Living Standard"
.Pp
.Lk https://www.w3.org/TR/xml "Extensible Markup Language (XML) Reference"
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Thomas Voss Aq Mt mail@thomasvoss.com
